Hello, everyone, in this section of the course, we are going to learn about user roles and permissions
first.
We will review the way that WordPress handles roles and permissions by default right out of the box.
And then after that, we will learn how to customize WordPress to operate exactly the way that we want
it to.
So without further ado.
Right now, let's jump into an example of why roles and permissions are so important in the first place.
So a lot of larger Web sites require a team effort.
One single person cannot handle creating, inputting and updating all of the content.
So let's imagine that we have a co-worker that's going to help us manage this university site.
So we need to get them access to the admen dashboard.
Now, some people just share their main admen user name and password with everyone on their team.
But that is a potential security nightmare.
Ideally, we want each person on a project to have their own unique username and password account.
So follow along with me right now.
Let's go create a brand new account for our hypothetical co-worker.
So to create a new user account, you can either hover over new up in this top, add Minbar and then
choose user.
Or if you just jump into the main admin dashboard down towards the bottom of the sidebar, we see users
and then choose add new.
So first we need to choose a user name.
Feel free to make up whatever user name you want, but I'm going to pretend that my cat is my co-worker.
That's going to help me manage the site.
So Kitty Doe, then we need an e-mail address.
If you have an alternate email address that is different from your main admin account, you can use
that here.
Or since we are really only doing this as a test, you could enter a really long fake gibberish email.
But I would only do that if this Web site is only ever going to live on your local host.
If you're working on a real Web site, you would someday like to push up live onto the Internet.
Then I recommend spending the time to create a real email address that we can use here.
OK, then these next three fields are optional.
We can leave them blank.
OK.
And the next thing I want to draw our attention to is the password.
By default, WordPress will generate its own random password for the user and then send it via email.
But in this case, I don't want to have to worry about retrieving an email so you can just click show
password and then just feel free to type in and create whatever password you can easily remember.
All right.
And finally, perhaps the most important thing on this screen is the role by default out of the box.
WordPress offers us these five choices.
A subscriber basically cannot do anything.
All they can do is manage their own profile info.
So things like their own first name and last name, one level above a subscriber is a contributor.
A contributor is someone who can create a rough draft for a post or page, but they can't actually publish
it so that the entire world can view it on the Web site.
And then one level above that is an author.
Authors are allowed to sign in and actually create and publish content, live up onto the Web site for
the whole world to see.
However, an author can only make changes to a post if they are the ones that created it in the first
place.
An author cannot change someone else's content.
An editor, however, can.
An editor cannot only create their own content, but they also have permission to edit and delete other
people's posts and pages.
And then finally, an admin has full, complete access to do whatever they want to the Web site.
And even if you completely trust someone, you might not want to make them an administrator unless they
are fairly tech savvy because it gives them the potential to really mess up a Web site.
So let's imagine that we invite our co-worker to be an editor.
So I chose the editor role and then just click add new user and they receive the new account.
Now, let's go ahead and try to log in as that new user account.
There's actually no need to log out out of our main admin account.
Instead, what we can do is just open up a new private browser window.
So in Google Chrome, that's referred to as a new incognito window.
So within this new window, if we visit our Web sites, you are well.
For me, that's local host.
Three thousand.
You can see that even though I'm logged in as the admen within my main browser window.
That's using my normal browser mode because this is using private mode.
We can log into a completely separate account.
So right now, WordPress considers this window a stranger.
But if we just go to slash WP admen, well, then we can log in as that new user account.
Cool.
So since this user is an editor and not an administrator, they don't have access to screens like appearance,
plug ins or settings.
But they do have full access to all six of our post types.
Right.
Blog posts, pages, campuses, events, programs and professors.
And if that's what you want, you want this co-worker to be able to manage all of the post types.
Then you could almost stop here.
And this lesson is over.
However, in the real world, you don't always want to give someone editor access to all post types.
So as an example, let's imagine that we only want this co-worker to be able to manage the event posts.
So basically, we want this user to be an event planner and nothing more.
So the question becomes, how do we only give them access to that one post time?
Well, the answer is that we can just create our own brand new role.
So out of the box, WordPress starts with those five roles.
We saw a moment ago, subscriber, contributor, author, editor and admen.
And you and I can just create a brand new custom role and give it only the exact permissions that we
want.
So how do we go about creating a brand new role?
Well, if you know me, you know that I always try to use as few of plugins as possible.
However, there is a user roles and permissions plugin that is just so perfect and makes life so much
easier.
I can't help but recommend it.
It's completely free and it's an industry standard.
So let's go install the plug in right now.
So back in my main window where I am the ad man, lets hover over plug ins and then click add new.
And then in the top right corner.
Let's use the search bar to search for members.
So this is the plug and we're interested in.
You'll know that it's the right plug in if it's by member press.
And as of this recording, it has over 200000 active installations.
I believe if you search for members role editor, then it will show up as the first results.
Yep.
Here it is.
So let's go ahead and install now and then be sure to click.
Activate.
All right.
And now let's get back to the task at hand.
Let's create a new custom user role that can only manage the event post time.
OK.
And to begin using the new plug in in the left hand side bar, we now see members.
So if you hover over that, then we can click on roles.
Just a quick note before we go on any further.
When I first created this course, we used this same plug in, but it went by a different name.
Also, back then, you navigated to this role screen by hovering over the users menu in the left hand
side bar.
So if in a future video lesson you see me trying to navigate to this roles screen, please don't try
to find this screen from the user's menu.
Just know that you can always find this screen under the members menu in the sidebar so its members
and then roles, you can see all of the roles that you currently have.
At the moment we just have the default five that word press comes with.
And instead of modifying any of these, let's just create a brand new role.
So in the sidebar, under users, let's click add new role.
We can name this role whatever we want.
The name does not matter, but I'm going to call it event planner, since the only thing I want this
role to have access to is the event post time.
OK.
And as you can see, we simply grant or deny this new role, different permissions and abilities.
We are currently viewing the tab for general capabilities.
But if we wanted to grant this role permission to create blog posts, we could click on this or for
the page post type, we could click on pages.
However, we notice that we don't see a tab for our custom post types.
Right.
Things like events, campuses, programs and professors.
And this is because by default, when it comes to permissions and capabilities and WordPress, custom
post types are treated like generic blog posts.
Meaning if we clicked on the posts and checked the boxes to grant permission to this new role, that
would actually also grant permission to our for custom post types, because new custom post types by
default inherit the permissions and abilities from generic blog posts.
So what we need to do right now is go and edit the code where we registered the events post type.
So over in your text editor, instead of your theme folder, I want you to jump in to the M.
You must use plugins folder and within this file where we registered our different post types.
Let's scroll down until we find event and we basically just want to tell the event post type that it
should not behave like a blog post when it comes to permissions and capabilities.
Instead, it should require its own unique permissions and capabilities.
So maybe right before this supports line, let's just add a brand new line and let's say capability
type and let's set it to equal event.
Be sure to include a comma at the end.
Now, without this line, sort of the unspoken context and WordPress is that capability type is post
by default, which means as long as you have the permissions required to create a blog post, you also
have the permissions to create an event.
So by setting this to something unique like event, well, now we need to explicitly grant these custom
event permissions to each role as we see fit.
Or actually, I should say that this line of code creates new unique capabilities for event.
But then in order to actually enforce and require these permissions, we need a new line where we say
Map, Medda cap, which stands for capabilities and set that to equal.
True.
Without this line of code.
We would need to program our own custom logic for when these new capabilities should be required.
So, for example, if you were building some weird, crazy Web site that defied all normal logic, maybe
for some weird reason you would want to set things up so that on the fourth day of the month, if your
user name starts with the letter s, then everyone on the Web site is allowed to edit events.
That's how flexible WordPress is.
It would allow you to set something like that up.
But most of the time, we do not need that.
So this line of code is our way of just saying, hey, WordPress, can you please reasonably require
event related permissions in order to edit and manage event post types?
Can you require the right permission at the right time?
In a sane fashion for us automatically.
OK.
So it's going to automatically map and require the right capabilities at the right time.
Cool.
Now let's go ahead and save this.
And with these two lines of code in place, if we jump back into the admen panel and refresh this screen
where we were trying to create a new role since I refreshed it looks like I need to type in the title
again.
So I will say event planner, but thanks to that new code that we just wrote, we now see a tab.
For events, so we can click on that and let's just go ahead and grant our event planner role.
All of these permissions so they can create their own events and they can edit and delete other people's
events.
All right, then, let's be sure to click, add, roll to save our progress.
And now let's go edit our co-workers account to assign them this new role.
So in the sidebar, under users, I will click all users.
Here's my kiddo coworker account.
Click on that.
Scroll down to the very bottom and we see this rolls area.
So I'm just going to d select Ed and then choose event planner.
Go ahead and update that.
And then back in my private window.
This is the window where I'm logged in as the co-worker.
I used to have access to all of the post times.
But now as soon as I refresh, I only have access to events.
Perfect.
And why don't we go ahead and test it out really quick?
So if I try to add a new event, maybe give it a title of math party, lorem ipsum dummy text.
Let's set the event date for September 2020.
It doesn't need a subtitle, but let's be sure to relate this program to math, since I called it math
party.
And then if I go ahead and publish that.
And then pull up the front end of the Web site.
And search for math.
Cool.
There we see under events, math party.
So things are working perfectly.
However, back in our main window where we are logged in as the admen, you might have noticed that
we no longer see events in our sidebar.
And that's because we only explicitly granted event permission to the event planner role.
But we probably also want to grant it to the administrator role.
So let's do that right now by looking under the user sidebar and clicking roles.
And then let's edit the administrator role.
Click on events and then go ahead and grant all of the capabilities.
Let's go ahead and update that.
And sometimes you need to refresh the page again.
But once I do, you can see I now have access to events again as the ad man.
Perfect.
Now, before we bring this lesson to a close, I want to cover something that blew my mind when I first
learned about it, and that is that the members plug in makes it super easy to assign multiple roles
to a single user.
The reason this is so cool is you can create a bunch of different super specific roles.
And then depending on the co-worker that you want to invite into your project, you can combine the
roles to create the perfect recipe for their unique set of responsibilities.
So let me give you an example.
We've already created the event planner role.
Now let's go create another new role named campus manager.
So that would be someone who can only manage the campus post type.
I know this might seem a bit repetitive, but practice makes perfect.
So to set that up first, let's go back into our text editor and within the file where we register all
of our different post types.
Let's scroll down and find campus.
Actually, for me, I think it's up at the very top.
And anywhere in this, associates have array.
Let's just add on capability type equals and it doesn't need to match what the post type name is.
It just needs to be something unique.
But just to make sense, I'm going to say campus comma.
And then let's also say map cap equals true, OK?
Now, as soon as I save that, we can go back into the Admon dashboard and create a brand new role.
So to do that under the user side, Bartletts click add new role.
Let's name it campus manager.
Thanks to the code that we just wrote.
We see a campus tab here.
Let's click that.
Let's grant all of the capabilities.
And then click, add, roll.
OK.
And now if we invited a second or third or fourth co-worker into the project, we could obviously assign
them the campus manager role.
But what I think is super cool is we can also give this role to our existing Kitty Doe account.
So under users, if we click all users and click on the coworker account that we created at the beginning
of this lesson, scroll down to the very bottom.
And maybe we want this user to be an event planner and a campus manager.
So when I first found out that you could combine multiple roles, I was so excited because for the longest
time you could do this and other content management systems.
But there was no super easy, intuitive way of doing it in WordPress.
So let's go ahead and click update user.
And then back in my other private window where I am logged in as the co-worker.
If I go back into the admin panel and refresh.
I now also have access to campuses.
This might not seem that cool or like that big of a deal at first, but trust me, it opens up the door
to an infinite number of possibilities.
You can create as many different roles as you need to and then perfectly mix and match and combine them
on a user by user basis, which I think is super useful.
Now, before we close this lesson out, just because practice makes perfect.
Remember that what we just did will remove the campus abilities from the admin.
And I like to make sure that my admen always has full access.
So just go back into roles.
Edit the administrator and just make sure to give it campus permissions or campus capabilities.
Cool.
Now, you might need to manually refresh, but as soon as I do, you can see campus's is back in business
for ADD.
And that will bring this lesson to a close in our next lesson.
We will learn how to setup open registration so that anyone can come to our Web site and sign up for
a new account.
Now, at first, the account won't have permissions or capabilities to do anything.
But in future lessons, we will learn how to give them special little abilities that will not hurt the
security of our site.
So let's keep things rolling.
And I will see.
And then.